Ketamine is known to rapidly reduce depressive symptoms and suicidal ideation (SI) in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD), but evidence is limited for its acceptability and effectiveness in "real-world" settings. This case series examines serial ketamine infusions in reducing SI and depression scores in adults with MDD admitted to a tertiary care hospital.Five inpatients with MDD and SI admitted to hospital in Toronto, Canada received six infusions of 0.5?mg/kg intravenous (IV) ketamine (n?=?5) over approximately 12 days, in addition to treatment-as-usual. Suicide and depression rating scores (Scale for Suicidal Ideation, SSI; Montgomery-?sberg Depression Rating Scale, MADRS) were obtained at baseline, on treatment days, on days 14 and 42 (primary endpoint).All patients experienced benefit with ketamine. SSI scores diminished by 84% from 14.0?¡À?4.5 at baseline to 2.2?¡À?2.5 at study endpoint. MADRS scores diminished by 47% from 42.2?¡À?5.3 at baseline to 22.4?¡À?8.0. Two patients withdrew from the study, one to initiate electroconvulsive therapy and one due to an adverse event (dissociative effects) during the ketamine infusion.The major limitation of this study is the small sample size.These preliminary pilot data are promising with a greater than two-fold reduction in SI following ketamine infusions. They demonstrate that six serial ketamine infusions may be safe and feasible. These findings support the need for large scale randomized controlled trials to confirm the efficacy of serial ketamine for treatment of SI in "real-world" settings.
Bipolar disorder (BPD) is a chronic and recurrent mood disorder characterized by episodes of mania, hypomania, and major depression. Based on available evidence, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and inflammation have important roles in the pathophysiology of bipolar depression. More specifically, it seems that coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a mitochondrial modulator, as well as an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent, might be effective in modulating these pathophysiological pathways. Accordingly, the aim of this study was to investigate whether and to what extent, compared with placebo, adjuvant CoQ10 might improve symptoms of depression in patients with BPD.A total of 69 patients with BPD with a current depressive episode were randomly assigned either to the adjuvant CoQ10 (200 mg/d) or to the placebo group. Standard medication consisting of mood stabilizers and antidepressants was consistent 2 months prior and during the study. Depression severity for each patient was assessed based on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale scores at baseline, fourth week, and eighth week of the study.Symptoms of depression decreased over time in both groups. Compared with the placebo group, adjuvant CoQ10 to a standard medication improved symptoms of depression after 8 weeks of treatment. In addition, at the end of the study, it turned out that more responders were observed in the CoQ10 group, compared with the placebo group. CoQ10 had minimal adverse effects and was well tolerated.The present pattern of results suggests that among patients with BPD, compared with placebo, adjuvant CoQ10 probably because of its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties can improve symptoms of depression over a period of 8 weeks.
This randomized controlled trial examined the effectiveness of Emotionally Focused Therapy (EFT) for depression and relationship satisfaction versus usual care (i.e., couple therapy other than EFT), and explored mechanisms of change. Mixed model trajectory analyses of 16 couples indicated EFT was associated with greater improvement in relationship satisfaction among men and women. Men receiving EFT reported greater improvements in depressive symptoms compared to usual care. Unified structural equation modeling revealed changes in relationship satisfaction preceded changes in depressive symptoms in one cluster of partners, while changes in depression preceded changes in relationship satisfaction in a second cluster. Two other clusters reported simultaneous changes in satisfaction and depression. This study provides encouraging results on the effectiveness of EFT for depression, and insight into mechanisms of change.
Despite widespread use of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in clinical practice, its mechanisms with respect to brain networks remain sparsely described. In this study, we applied tools from graph theory and network science to better understand the transdiagnostic neural mechanisms of this treatment for depression. A sample of 64 subjects was included in a study of network dynamics: 33 patients (15 MDD, 18 PTSD) received longitudinal fMRI resting state scans before and after 12 weeks of CBT. Depression severity was rated on the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). Thirty-one healthy controls were included to determine baseline network roles. Univariate and multivariate regression analyses were conducted on the normalized change scores of within- and between-system connectivity and normalized change score of the MADRS. Penalized regression was used to select a sparse set of predictors in a data-driven manner. Univariate analyses showed greater symptom reduction was associated with an increased functional role of the Ventral Attention (VA) system as an incohesive provincial system (decreased between- and decreased within-system connectivity). Multivariate analyses selected between-system connectivity of the VA system as the most prominent feature associated with depression improvement. Observed VA system changes are interesting in light of brain controllability descriptions: attentional control systems, including the VA system, fall on the boundary between-network communities, and facilitate integration or segregation of diverse cognitive systems. Thus, increasing segregation of the VA system following CBT (decreased between-network connectivity) may result in less contribution of emotional attention to cognitive processes, thereby potentially improving cognitive control.
Although several pharmacological options to treat depression are currently available, approximately one third of patients who receive antidepressant medications do not respond adequately or achieve a complete remission. Thus, novel strategies are needed to successfully address those who did not respond, or partially respond, to available antidepressant pharmacotherapy. Research findings revealed that the opioid system is significantly involved in the regulation of mood and incentives salience and may be an appropriate target for novel therapeutic agents. The present study aimed to systematically review the current literature about the use of buprenorphine (BUP) for major depression, treatment-resistant depression (TRD), non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) behavior, and suicidal behavior. We investigated Pubmed and Scopus databases using the following keywords: "buprenorphine AND depression", "buprenorphine AND treatment resistant depression", "buprenorphine AND suicid*", "buprenorphine AND refractory depression". Several evidence demonstrate that, at low doses, BUP is an efficacious, well-tolerated, and safe option in reducing depressive symptoms, serious suicidal ideation, and NSSI, even in patients with TRD. However, more studies are needed to evaluate the long-term effects, and relative efficacy of specific combinations (e.g., BUP + samidorphan (BUP/SAM), BUP + naloxone (BUP/NAL), BUP + naltrexone) over BUP monotherapy or adjunctive BUP treatment with standard antidepressants, as well as to obtain more uniform guidance about the optimal BUP dosing interval.
Long-term physical conditions affect 10% to 12% of children and adolescents worldwide; these individuals are at greater risk of developing psychological problems, particularly anxiety and depression. Access to face-to-face treatment for such problems is often limited, and available interventions usually have not been tested with this population. As technology improves, e-health interventions (delivered via digital means, such as computers and smart phones and ranging from simple text-based programmes through to multimedia and interactive programmes, serious games, virtual reality and biofeedback programmes) offer a potential solution to address the psychological needs of this group of young people.To assess the effectiveness of e-health interventions in comparison with attention placebos, psychological placebos, treatment as usual, waiting-list controls, or non-psychological treatments for treating anxiety and depression in children and adolescents with long-term physical conditions.We searched the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Group's Controlled Trials Register (CCMDTR to May 2016), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (Issue 8, 2017), Web of Science (1900 - 18 August 2016, updated 31 August 2017) and Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO (cross-search 2016 to 18 Aug 2017). We hand-searched relevant conference proceedings, reference lists of included articles, and the grey literature to May 2016. We also searched international trial registries to identify unpublished or ongoing trials.We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs), cluster-randomised trials, and cross-over trials of e-health interventions for treating any type of long-term physical condition in children and adolescents (aged 0 to 18 years), and that measured changes in symptoms or diagnoses of anxiety, depression, or subthreshold depression. We defined long-term physical conditions as those that were more than three-months' duration. We assessed symptoms of anxiety and depression using patient- or clinician-administered validated rating scales based on DSM III, IV or 5 (American Psychological Association 2013), or ICD 9 or 10 criteria (World Health Organization 1992). Formal depressive and anxiety disorders were diagnosed using structured clinical interviews. Attention placebo, treatment as usual, waiting list, psychological placebo, and other non-psychological therapies were eligible comparators.Two review authors independently reviewed titles, abstracts, and full-text articles; discrepancies were resolved through discussion or addressed by a third author. When available, we used odds ratio (OR) to compare dichotomous data and standardised mean differences (SMD) to analyse continuous data, both with 95% confidence intervals (CI). We undertook meta-analysis when treatments, participants, and the underlying clinical question were adequately similar. Otherwise, we undertook a narrative analysis.We included five trials of three interventions (Breathe Easier Online, Web-MAP, and multimodal cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)), which included 463 participants aged 10 to 18 years. Each trial contributed to at least one meta-analysis. Trials involved children and adolescents with long-term physical conditions, such as chronic headache (migraine, tension headache, and others), chronic pain conditions (abdominal, musculoskeletal, and others), chronic respiratory illness (asthma, cystic fibrosis, and others), and symptoms of anxiety or depression. Participants were recruited from community settings and hospital clinics in high income countries.For the primary outcome of change in depression symptoms versus any control, there was very low-quality evidence meaning that it could not be determined whether e-health interventions were clearly better than any comparator (SMD -0.06, 95% CI -0.35 to 0.23; five RCTs, 441 participants). For the primary outcome of change in anxiety symptoms versus any comparator, there was very low-quality evidence meaning that it could not be determined whether e-health interventions were clearly better than any comparator (SMD -0.07, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.14; two RCTs, 324 participants). For the primary outcome of treatment acceptability, there was very low-quality evidence that e-health interventions were less acceptable than any comparator (SMD 0.46, 95% CI 0.23 to 0.69; two RCTs, 304 participants).For the secondary outcome of quality of life, there was very low-quality evidence meaning that it could not be determined whether e-health interventions were clearly better than any comparator (SMD -0.83, 95% CI -1.53 to -0.12; one RCT, 34 participants). For the secondary outcome of functioning, there was very low-quality evidence meaning that it could not be determined whether e-health interventions were clearly better than any comparator (SMD -0.08, 95% CI -0.33 to 0.18; three RCTs, 368 participants). For the secondary outcome of status of long-term physical condition, there was very low-quality evidence meaning that it could not be determined whether e-health interventions were clearly better than any comparator (SMD 0.06, 95% CI -0.12 to 0.24; five RCTs, 463 participants).The risk of selection bias was considered low in most trials. However, the risk of bias due to inadequate blinding of participants or outcome assessors was considered unclear or high in all trials. Only one study had a published protocol; two trials had incomplete outcome data. All trials were conducted by the intervention developers, introducing another possible bias. No adverse effects were reported by any authors.At present, the field of e-health interventions for the treatment of anxiety or depression in children and adolescents with long-term physical conditions is limited to five low quality trials. The very low-quality of the evidence means the effects of e-health interventions are uncertain at this time, especially in children aged under 10 years.Although it is too early to recommend e-health interventions for this clinical population, given their growing number, and the global improvement in access to technology, there appears to be room for the development and evaluation of acceptable and effective technologically-based treatments to suit children and adolescents with long-term physical conditions.
The aim of this study was to screen the genes related to the pathogenesis of major depression disorder (MDD) by bioinformatics. Taking GSE98793 chip data from GEO public database of National Biotechnology Information Center (NCBI) website as the research object, 116 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened by R language limma package. Among the 116 DEGs, 66 genes were up-regulated and 50 down-regulated. The results of gene functional annotation analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) showed that the DEGs were mainly distributed in mitochondria intima and mitochondria. They were involved in copper ion binding, cysteine-type endopeptidase activity, the cell response of interleukin-1, protein processing and other biological processes. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis results showed that the DEGs were mainly concentrated in oxidative phosphorylation, Parkinson's disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease etc. The results of protein interaction network analysis showed that there were interactions among proteins encoded by 54 DEGs. Combined with the analysis results of the above methods, 11 key genes were screened out, including UQCRC1, GZMB, NDUFB9, NSF, SLC17A5, CTSH, NDUFB10, UQCR10, ATOX1, CST7 and CTSW, which could be used as candidate genes for the diagnosis and treatment of MDD. Taken together, the key genes were obtained by analyzing the microarray and the DEGs of MDD in the present study, which would provide important clues for revealing the molecular mechanism and clinical targeted therapy of depression.
We report the case of a 44-year-old school teacher who experienced long-term relief from tension-type headache (TTH) and major depression following chiropractic treatment. It is well recognized that psychiatric comorbidity and suicide risk are commonly found in patients with painful physical symptoms such as chronic headache, backache, or joint pain. Recent studies indicated that autonomic dysfunction plays a role in the pathogenesis of TTHs and depressive disorders. The autonomic nervous system is mainly controlled by reflex centers located in the spinal cord, brain stem, and hypothalamus. This report highlights the rewarding outcomes from spinal adjustment in certain neuropsychiatric disorders. Long-term results of chiropractic adjustment in this particular case were very favorable. Further studies with larger groups are warranted to better clarify the role of chiropractic.
Anxiety and depression are common among patients attending cardiac rehabilitation services. Currently available pharmacological and psychological interventions have limited effectiveness in this population. There are presently no psychological interventions for anxiety and depression integrated into cardiac rehabilitation services despite emphasis in key UK National Health Service policy. A new treatment, metacognitive therapy, is highly effective at reducing anxiety and depression in mental health settings. The principal aims of the current study are (1) to evaluate the acceptability of delivering metacognitive therapy in a home-based self-help format (Home-MCT) to cardiac rehabilitation patients experiencing anxiety and depressive symptoms and conduct a feasibility trial of Home-MCT plus usual cardiac rehabilitation compared to usual cardiac rehabilitation; and (2) to inform the design and sample size for a full-scale trial.The PATHWAY Home-MCT trial is a single-blind feasibility randomised controlled trial comparing usual cardiac rehabilitation (control) versus usual cardiac rehabilitation plus home-based self-help metacognitive therapy (intervention). Economic and qualitative evaluations will be embedded within the trial. Participants will be assessed at baseline and followed-up at 4 and 12 months. Patients who have been referred to cardiac rehabilitation programmes and have a score of ¡Ý?8 on the anxiety and/or depression subscales of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale will be invited to take part in the study and written informed consent will be obtained. Participants will be recruited from the National Health Service in the UK. A minimum of 108 participants will be randomised to the intervention and control arms in a 1:1 ratio.The Home-MCT feasibility randomised controlled trial will provide evidence on the acceptability of delivering metacognitive therapy in a home-based self-help format for cardiac rehabilitation patients experiencing symptoms of anxiety and/or depression and on the feasibility and design of a full-scale trial. In addition, it will provide provisional point estimates, with appropriately wide measures of uncertainty, relating to the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the intervention.This study aims to investigate existing evidence for the effectiveness of psychological treatments and/or antidepressant medication as a treatment for those diagnosed with moderate levels of depression.A PRISMA systematic review of articles using electronic research databases (2000-2014) was conducted to identify studies investigating the effectiveness of psychotherapy and/or medication as a treatment for people with moderate levels of depression. Search terms included moderate depression, psychotherapy and/or medication, depressive disorders, antidepressants, psychotherapy, mental health services, and randomized-controlled trial (RCT). The included studies were then assessed, extracted, and synthesised.A total of 14 studies met the inclusion criteria (11 RCTs and three additional studies) for this review. The findings of the systematic review indicate that there is limited evidence available specific to the treatment of moderate depression and that this research seems to suggest that psychotherapy or combined treatment has a beneficial effect.Given that depression is one of the biggest challenges the world faces at present, further research is required to examine the effectiveness of treatment for different levels of depression severity.
