The outcome of local treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains poor, with therapies such as induction chemotherapy (IC) yielding conflicting results. This study aimed to assess the clinicopathologic and prognostic significance of the excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1), beclin-1, and glucose-regulated protein of molecular mass 78 (GRP78) in patients with locally advanced NSCLC receiving docetaxel-platinum IC, along with efficacy and safety.
The malignant biological behavior of gastric cancer(GC) is not only determined by cancer cells alone, but also closely regulated by the microenvironment. Fibroblasts represent a large proportion of the components in the tumor microenvironment, and they promote the development of disease. Currently, accumulating evidence suggests that exosomes can function as intercellular transport systems to relay their contents, especially microRNAs(miRNAs).
For whole esophagus and T-shaped field radiotherapy using intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) technique in advanced esophageal cancer, lower absorbed doses to lung and heart remains a challenge. The aim of this study was to investigate the dosimetric superiority in IMRT plans with jaw tracking technique for whole esophagus radiotherapy.
Lung stereotactic-body radiotherapy (SBRT) places additional requirements on targeting accuracy over standard approaches. In treatment planning, a tumour volume is geometrically expanded and the resulting planning target volume (PTV) is covered with full dose. This ensures full dose delivery despite various uncertainties encountered during treatment. &#13; &#13; We developed a retrospective technique for optimizing the PTV expansion for a patient population. The method relies on deformable image registration (DIR) of the planning CT to a treatment cone-beam CT (CBCT). The resulting transformation is used to map the planned target onto the treatment geometry, allowing the computation of the achieved target/PTV overlap. &#13; &#13; Basic validation of the method was performed using an anthropomorphic respiratory motion phantom. A self-validation technique was also implemented to allow estimation of the DIR error for the data being analyzed. Our workflow was used to retrospectively optimize PTV margin for 25 patients treated over 93 fractions. Targets for these patients were contoured on four-dimensional CT images. SBRT delivery followed CBCT acquisition and a couch correction. A post-treatment CBCT was also acquired in some cases. &#13; &#13; Our basic validation demonstrated that the DIR-based technique is capable of transforming targets volumes from planning CTs to treatment CBCTs with sub-mm accuracy. Our clinical analysis showed that the minimum percentages of target volumes covered for 3, 4, and 5mm PTV margins were 92.1, 97.6, and 99.2, respectively. Analyzing data acquired before and just after treatment demonstrated that margins exceeding 5mm did not significantly improve coverage. Finally, a 5mm PTV margin achieved ¡Ý95% target volume coverage with ¡Ý95% probability.&#13; &#13; Our technique is accurate, automated, self-validating, and incorporates complex ITV shapes/deformations to allow PTV margin optimization. The analysis of clinical data indicates a 5mm PTV margin is optimal for our process. This approach is generalizable to other disease sites and treatment strategies. &#13.
Increasing evidence shows that intrafraction tumour motion monitoring must include both six degrees of freedom (6DoF): 3D translations and 3D rotations. Existing real- time algorithms for 6DoF target motion estimation requires continuous intrafraction fluoroscopic imaging at high frequency, thereby exposing patients to additional high imaging dose. This paper presents the first method capable of 6DoF motion monitoring using intermittent 2D kV imaging and a continuous external respiratory signal.&#13; Method: Our approach is to optimise a state-augmented linear correlation model between an external signal and internal 6DoF motion. In standard treatments, the model can be built using information obtained during pre-treatment CBCT. Real-time 6DoF tumor motion can then be estimated using just the external signal. Intermittent intrafraction kV images are used to update the model parameters, accounting for changes in correlation and baseline shifts.&#13; The method was evaluated in silico using data from 6 lung SABR patients, with the internal tumour motion recorded with electromagnetic beacons and the external signal from a bellows belt. Projection images from CBCT (10 Hz) and intermittent kV images were simulated by projecting the 3D Calypso beacon positions onto an imager. IMRT and VMAT treatments were simulated with increasing imaging update intervals: 0.1 s, 1 s, 3 s, 10 s and 30 s.&#13; Results: For all the tested clinical scenarios, translational motion estimates with our method had sub-mm accuracy (mean) and precision (standard deviation) while rotational motion estimates were accurate to &lt;1¡ã and precise to 2¡ã. Motion estimation errors increased as the imaging update interval increased. With the largest imaging update interval (30 s), the errors were 0.1¡À0.6 mm, -0.0¡À0.7 mm and 0.1¡À0:9 mm for translation in the Left-Right, Superior-Inferior and Anterior-Posterior directions, respectively, and 0.1¡À1.3¡ã, -0.3¡À2.0¡ã and 0.1¡À0:9¡ã for rotation around the aforementioned axes for both VMAT and IMRT treatments.
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a malignant neuroendocrine tumor with very high mortality. Effective new therapy for advanced SCLC patients is urgently needed. By screening a FDA-approved drug library, we identified a cardiac glycoside (CG), namely digoxin (an inhibitor of cellular Na
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most aggressive histologic subtype of lung cancer, with a strong predilection for early brain metastases. Despite efforts and advances in new therapeutics for SCLC, the prognosis of patients with SCLC with brain metastases is consistently poor. Therefore, a better understanding of the mechanisms of SCLC brain metastasis is important in improving current treatments. In this study, elevated S100A16 levels were associated with SCLC brain metastases, which was a possible secondary event arising from the brain metastatic microenvironment. Using an in vitro cell coculture system, we found that the coculturing of SCLC cells with human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) led to an increased expression of S100A16 in SCLC cells. Conversely, treatment of HBMECs with GW4869, an inhibitor of exosome release, significantly blocked this effect in the cocultured SCLC cells. Alternatively, the results from Western blot analyses and immunofluorescence indicated that the HBMEC exosomes purified by ultracentrifugation also induced the elevation and translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus of S100A16 in the recipient SCLC cells. The inhibition experiments demonstrated that elevated S100A16 contributed a benefit of HBMEC exosomes for the survival of the recipient SCLC cells under stress. Moreover, the elevation of S100A16 in SCLC cells prevented the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (¦¤¦×m) and enhanced resistance to apoptosis under stressful conditions, which were determined by Annexin V/propidium iodide and JC-1 assay. Further results showed that the S100A16-mediated protective effect was caused by the presence of an important element in ¦¤¦×m, prohibitin (PHB)-1, a protein in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Conversely, the delivery of PHB-1 siRNAs into S100A16 overexpressing SCLC cells weakened these protective effects. Our findings suggest that elevated S100A16 plays an active role in facilitating the survival of SCLC cells through modulating the mitochondrial function, identifying S100A16 as an important potential target in SCLC brain metastasis.-Xu, Z.-H., Miao, Z.-W., Jiang, Q.-Z., Gan, D.-X., Wei, X.-G., Xue, X.-Z., Li, J.-Q., Zheng, F., Qin, X.-X., Fang, W.-G., Chen, Y.-H., Li. B. Brain microvascular endothelial cell exosome-mediated S100A16 up-regulation confers small cell lung cancer cell survival in brain.
We report a case of a 51-year-old man with limbic encephalitis (LE) associated with antibodies against the ¦Á-Amino-3-Hydroxy-5-Methyl-4-Isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR). The patient presented with anterograde memory loss for 2 months. Cranial magnetic resonance and electroencephalogram were normal. AMPAR antibodies were found in blood serum and cerebrospinal fluid. All other test results were unremarkable. CT scans found a tumor in the right lobus superior pulmonis. A CT-guided needle biopsy was performed and pathological results showed small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The patient was diagnosed with LE associated with AMPAR antibodies and SCLC. Three months after immunotherapy and tumor removal, patient's memory was partially restored. We recommend that AMPAR antibodies should be detected in patients with classic LE with or without tumor. Prompt treatment of the tumor and immunotherapy are important.
Cancer precision medicine largely relies on knowledge about genetic aberrations in tumors and next-generation-sequencing studies have shown a high mutational complexity in many cancers. Although a large number of the observed mutations is believed to be not causally linked with cancer, the functional effects of many rare mutations but also of combinations of driver mutations are often unknown. Here, we perform a systems analysis of a model of EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer resistant to targeted therapy that integrates whole exome sequencing, global time-course discovery phosphoproteomics and computational modeling to identify functionally relevant molecular alterations. Our approach allows for a complexity reduction from over 2,000 genetic events potentially involved in mediating resistance to only 44 phosphoproteins and 35 topologically close genetic alterations. We perform single- and combination-drug testing against the predicted phosphoproteins and discovered that targeting of HSPB1, DBNL and AKT1 showed potent anti-proliferative effects overcoming resistance against EGFR-inhibitory therapy. Our approach may therefore be used to complement mutational profiling to identify functionally relevant molecular aberrations and propose combination therapies across cancers. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
mTOR pathway inhibitors such as rapalogs represent a promising tool to induce functional memory CD8 T cells. In this study, we investigated the combination of temsirolimus with anticancer vaccines. Using various designs of cancer vaccines (short and long peptides or the B subunit of Shiga toxin as an antigen delivery vector) and tumor models (melanoma, lung and colon cancer), we showed that the administration of temsirolimus efficiently decreased tumor growth and enhanced tumor-specific CD8 T-cell responses induced by vaccination. Furthermore, tumor-specific CD8 T cells induced by the bi-therapy (vaccine + temsirolimus) exhibit phenotypic characteristics of central memory (CD127
