A high number of patients with mental health disorders currently do not receive minimally adequate treatment, but remain solely in general practice. This is often due to long waiting times for psychotherapy, patient related barriers or diagnostic insecurity. For this reason, we have developed a care model that is applied directly in the general practitioner's (GP) office and is open to any form of psychosomatic disorder. The cornerstone of the model consists of a psychosomatic specialist consultation in the GP's office. Preliminary results concerning utilization and the target population show a high level of acceptance among patients, GPs, and psychosomatic specialists.
The objective of the present study was to compare neonatal outcomes including gestational age, birth weight and hospitalization of newborns of pregnant women with treated with antidepressants and untreated panic disorder.
It has been suggested that patients with anorexia nervosa (AN) who are resistant to first-line treatment would benefit from second-level interventions targeting specific features, an adaptive form of intervention. Guided self-help programs administered via mobile technology have the dual focus of instigating behavior change and managing anxiety associated with eating disorders in the moment and in users' naturalistic environments.
Microglial activation, increased proinflammatory cytokine production, and a reduction in synaptic density are key pathological features associated with HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Even with combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), more than 50% of HIV-positive individuals experience some type of cognitive impairment. Although viral replication is inhibited by cART, HIV proteins such as Tat are still produced within the nervous system that are neurotoxic, involved in synapse elimination, and provoke enduring neuroinflammation. As complement deposition on synapses followed by microglial engulfment has been shown during normal development and disease to be a mechanism for pruning synapses, we have tested whether complement is required for the loss of synapses that occurs after a cortical Tat injection mouse model of HAND. In Tat-injected animals evaluated 7 or 28 days after injection, levels of early complement pathway components, C1q and C3, are significantly elevated and associated with microgliosis and a loss of synapses. However, C1qa knockout mice have the same level of Tat-induced synapse loss as wild-type (WT) mice, showing that the C1q-initiated classical complement cascade is not driving synapse removal during HIV1 Tat-induced neuroinflammation.
Homelessness is an increasing societal and health issue associated with high rates of substance abuse and mental health disorders. Homeless people die more often and younger than others.
Hearing-impairment can lead to a reduced quality of life and thus represents a vulnerability factor for mental disorders.
Variation between homeless populations due to socioeconomic and environmental factors necessitates tailoring medical, health policy, and public health interventions to the unique needs of the homeless population served. Despite the relatively large size of the homeless population in Florida, there is a paucity of research that characterizes the homeless population who frequent homeless clinics within the state. This project describes the demographics, disease prevalence, and other risk factors among homeless individuals in Tampa, Florida. We conducted a retrospective chart review on adult homeless patients seen in 2015 and 2016 at two free clinic sites operated by Tampa Bay Street Medicine, a medical student-run organization from the University of South Florida in Tampa, Florida. Rates of diseases and substance use were recorded and Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) was calculated to assess mortality risk. Of the 183 homeless patients in this study, 34.4% reported hypertension, 13.7% reported diabetes, 27.1% reported a respiratory disease, 5.6% reported hyperlipidemia, and 32.8% reported a psychiatric disorder. Tobacco use was reported by 65.6% of patients, 32.2% reported alcohol use, and 17.5% reported illicit drug use. CCI was positively associated with age. Females reported higher rates of anemia, anxiety, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and psychiatric disorders. Hypertension, diabetes, certain respiratory diseases, and mental health disorders were more prevalent in the homeless population than in the general population in Tampa, Florida. Homeless women appeared to have higher morbidity than homeless men. Rates of tobacco and illicit drug use were significantly higher whereas alcohol use was lower in the study population than the general population. This study underscores the critical need for mental health initiatives, substance abuse treatment programs, and women's health programs that are accessible to the homeless in Tampa.
Phenomenological psychopathology is a body of scientific knowledge on which the clinical practice of psychiatry is based since the first decades of the twentieth century, a method to assess the patient's abnormal experiences from their own perspective, and more importantly, a science responsible for delimiting the object of psychiatry. Recently, the frontiers of phenomenological psychopathology have expanded to the productive development of therapeutic strategies that target the whole of existence in their actions. In this article, we present an overview of the current state of this discipline, summing up some of its key concepts, and highlighting its importance to clinical psychiatry today. Phenomenological psychopathology understands mental disorders as modifications of the main dimensions of the life-world: lived time, lived space, lived body, intersubjectivity, and selfhood. Psychopathological symptoms are the expression of a dialectical modification of the proportions of certain domains of the life-world or of the lived experience. The far-reaching relevance of the concepts of proportion and dialectics for the clinical agenda is explored. The article presents two contemporary models for clinical practice based on phenomenological psychopathology: Dialectical-proportional oriented approach and Person-centered dialectic approach (P.H.D. method). The main characteristics of these approaches are considered, as well as the new perspectives they bring to the challenges of psychiatric care in the twentieth-first century.
A limited number of medications are approved to treat Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD). Furthermore, the magnitude of their therapeutic effect is relatively modest, suggesting the potential for subtypes of patients who respond to a specific medication. The use of these medications is also limited in clinical practice by a series of contraindications such as medical comorbidities and/or concurrent use of other medications. In recent years, animal and human studies have been conducted to evaluate the efficacy of baclofen, a GABA
New digital technologies offer providers the promise of more accurately tracking patients' medication adherence. It is unclear, however, whether access to such information will affect provider treatment decisions in the real world.
Geriatric syndromes are complex clinical manifestations that are not an isolated disease in older adults and have common risk factors within themselves. The syndromes are significant causes of mortality, morbidity, and increased health care costs.
Apomorphine is a non-specific dopamine receptor agonist that has been used in the treatment of some diseases and mental disorders. Its use has particularly well documented in Parkinson's disease (PD). The dopaminergic agonists like apomorphine are related to oxidative processes that could induce cell damage and the functional impairment of some structures in the brain. However, most information about apomorphine in literature is focused on the improvement of the motor problems characteristic of PD, but little is known about the effects on cognitive behaviors and brain structures indirectly related to motor function. The presence of dopaminergic receptors in the hippocampus has recently been discovered, in connection with cognitive behaviors like learning and memory, these receptors are needed in neuronal plasticity. There has been a growing interest to know if this structure could be compromised by the effect of apomorphine and elucidate if part of the cognitive impairment present in the PD is due to the effect of apomorphine. In this mini-review, we summarized how apomorphine has been used since its creation, we discuss the latest information about its effect on the hippocampus and also the future perspectives to fully understand the effects of this compound.
The antibiotic minocycline has neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties that could prevent or reverse progressive neuropathic changes implicated in recent-onset schizophrenia. In the BeneMin study, we aimed to replicate the benefit of minocycline on negative symptoms reported in previous pilot studies, and to understand the mechanisms involved.
Due to improved survival rates of childhood cancer, there has been growing attention to survivors. In addition, experiences of illness in youth, during growth and development, affect the lives of these individuals in numerous ways. With a sample of long-term survivors of childhood cancer, this study investigated their difficult experiences after treatment completion and provided fundamental data for intervention programs that can assist growth.
Physical activity (PA) significantly improves physical health and clinical symptoms across mental disorders. Accredited Exercise Physiologists (AEPs) are trained to lead PA interventions for people with mental illness, but referrals to AEPs are low.
Early intervention in workers diagnosed with mental disorders is associated with a lower incidence of relapse and shorter sick leave. However, no studies have been carried out on the effect of early intervention using an evidence-based therapy, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), on people with sick leave.
General practitioners are mainly responsible for primary health care. Patients with mental disorders, in particular patients with complex or multiple needs, use these services infrequently in case of somatic complaints. Psychiatric outpatient clinics have to deal with these patients and have perhaps an additional role in diagnosing and treating somatic co-morbidities. This should be evaluated.
To report long-term health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and fatigue outcomes in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) receiving belimumab.
Anorexia nervosa (AN) is characterised by a failure to maintain a normal body weight due to a paucity of nutrition, an intense fear of gaining weight or behaviour that prevents the individual from gaining weight, or both. The long-term prognosis is often poor, with severe developmental, medical and psychosocial complications, high rates of relapse and mortality. 'Family therapy approaches' indicate a range of approaches, derived from different theories, that involve the family in treatment. We have included therapies developed on the basis of dominant family systems theories, approaches that are based on or broadly similar to the family-based therapy derived from the Maudsley model, approaches that incorporate a focus on cognitive restructuring, as well as approaches that involve the family without articulation of a theoretical approach.This is an update of a Cochrane Review first published in 2010.
While a growing body of research suggests that talk therapies can reduce anxiety and depression in adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), we know little about what community treatment for these disorders looks like for them. The present study investigated whether treatment utilization differs between adults with and without ASD who have anxiety or depression.
null
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective treatment for depression, but the mechanism of ECT for depression is still unclear. Recently, neuroimaging studies have reported that the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, angular gyrus, insular and other brain regions are involved in the mechanism of ECT for depression, and these regions are highly overlapped with the location of brain hubs. Here, we try to explore the effects of ECT on the functional connectivity of brain hubs in depression patients. In current study, depression patients were assessed at three time points: prior to ECT, at the completion of ECT and about 1 month after the completion of ECT. At each time point, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging, assessment of clinical symptoms and cognition function were performed respectively, which was compared with 20 normal controls. Functional connectivity strength (FCS) was used to identify brain hubs. The results showed that FCS of left angular gyrus in depression patients significantly increased after ECT, accompanied by improved mood. The changed FCS in depression patients recovered obviously at 1 month after the completion of ECT. It suggested that ECT could modulate functional connectivity of left angular gyrus in depression patients.
Anxiety disorders and/or depression are the most frequently diagnosed mental health problems (MHP) among American college students. Everyday technology (EDT) is being used with those who have MHP to help them cope with the mental/cognitive disabilities arising from having anxiety and/or depression. Deveau investigated the types of EDT students with MHP use to manage their roles as college students. While this research indicated that individuals with MHP were open to learning about EDT they can use, the author recommended further investigation of the topic. This qualitative study further investigated what types of EDT college students use to manage their anxiety disorder and/or depression. Our research found that while college students with anxiety and depression are familiar with and willing to use EDT to help compensate for some of the issues they have resulting from their anxiety and depression, some reported that the use of EDT contributes to their problems. Implications for further investigation include continuing to examine the use of EDT amongst a larger group of college students. Future research should also investigate creating a peer run technology group, taught by interested student such as occupational therapy, psychology or computer science students to name a few, to inform students about apps to manage scheduling, routines, medication management and symptoms management. Additionally, the positive and negative aspects of social media and how to manage ones use of it use would be a relevant topic for group discussion. Implications for rehabilitation While most college students currently use everyday technology as a part of their lives, it has positive and negative meanings to college students who have anxiety and/or depression. Finding out what a user wants to do with technology and the meaning it has for them is a critical part of insuring the right match between a person and an assistive technology intervention. Consider a full range of no to high technology options when working with college students who experience the mental/cognitive disabilities resulting from mental health problems to identify assistive technology solutions.
Lithium is the mainstay treatment in bipolar disorder (BD) for its effectiveness in the acute phases of illness and in prevention of recurrences. Lithium's mechanism of action is complex, and while it modulates the function of hundreds of molecular targets, most of these effects could be unspecific and not relevant for its clinical efficacy. In this study, we applied an integrated analytical approach using genome-wide expression and genotyping data from BD patients to identify lithium-responsive genes that may serve as biomarkers of its efficacy. To this purpose, we tested the effect of treatment with lithium chloride 1 mM on the transcriptome of lymphoblasts from 10 lithium responders (LR) and 10 nonresponders (NR) patients and identified genes significantly influenced by the treatment exclusively in LR. These findings were integrated with gene-based analysis on genome-wide genotyping data from an extended sample of 205 BD patients characterized for lithium response. The expression of 29 genes was significantly changed by lithium exclusively in LR. Gene-based analysis showed that two of these genes, zinc finger protein 429 (ZNF429) and zinc finger protein 493 (ZNF493), were also significantly associated with lithium response. Validation with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction confirmed the lithium-induced downregulation of ZNF493 in LR (p = .036). Using convergent analyses of genome-wide expression and genotyping data, we identified ZNF493 as a potential lithium-responsive target that may be involved in modulating lithium efficacy in BD. To our knowledge, this is the first evidence supporting the involvement of zinc finger proteins in lithium response.
The Brief Services psychotherapy paradigm has evolved to produce cost-effective and clinically significant outcomes in children's mental health. Though its clinical evaluation is still in its infancy, it has been utilized to a much lesser degree with autism spectrum disorders, which typically require a longer-term approach to psychotherapy treatment.
Individuals with serious mental illness (SMI) such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder face a higher risk of early death due to cardiovascular disease and other preventable chronic illnesses. Young adulthood is a critical window of development for lifestyle interventions to improve the long-term health and quality of life in this population. Fit Forward is an NIH-funded randomized clinical trial examining the effectiveness of a group lifestyle intervention (PeerFIT) enhanced with mobile health technology compared to one-on-one mobile lifestyle coaching with Basic Education in fitness and nutrition supported by a wearable Activity Tracking device (BEAT) in achieving clinically significant weight loss and improved cardiorespiratory fitness in young adults with SMI.
Dysregulations of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system (ANS) as parts of the stress response system have been associated with development and maintenance of various mental disorders. It has been suggested that these alterations might normalize in the course of psychotherapy. We conducted a comprehensive review of psychotherapeutic intervention effects on HPA axis and ANS regulation in adult samples with mental disorders. We searched four databases for psychotherapeutic intervention studies with mentally ill patient samples, assessing cortisol and/or α-amylase before and after treatment. Study quality and confounder consideration within biomarker assessment were examined. Twenty-five studies were included. Psychotherapeutic interventions and biomarker assessment methodology varied substantially between studies. Accordingly, meta-analytical computations were deemed unfeasible. Study characteristics especially regarding cortisol and α-amylase assessment and analysis procedures were comprehensively reviewed. Study quality and biomarker confounder consideration ratings were mostly moderate to strong. Based on the results, we provide recommendations regarding intervention design and biomarker assessment methodology to increase comparability of psychotherapeutic treatment effects in future studies.
The literature on co-morbid psychiatric illnesses in adults with high-functioning autism (HFA) spectrum disorder is sparse.
During intensive care unit (ICU) admission, patients and their carers experience physical and psychological stressors that may result in psychological conditions including anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Improving communication between healthcare professionals, patients, and their carers may alleviate these disorders. Communication may include information or educational interventions, in different formats, aiming to improve knowledge of the prognosis, treatment, or anticipated challenges after ICU discharge.
Assisted outpatient treatment (AOT) is an outpatient court-ordered treatment for people with severe mental illness (SMI) whose care needs are often unmet in the community due, in part, to treatment non-adherence. AOT is controversial, and the goal of this review is to provide an update on recent research, the status of AOT in the United States, and future directions for research and implementation.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is commonly associated with motor symptoms, however cognitive and neurobehavioral complications are increasingly recognized and contribute to long-term disability. Dopamine replacement therapy is effective for motor symptoms, but can also lead to motor side-effects and addictive behavior such as impulse control disorders. Molecular imaging is advancing our knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the development of behavioral addictions. This chapter will discuss potential risk factors and associations with the development of addictive behavior in PD including the role of dopaminergic medication and genetic predisposition. We further will describe the common neurobiology and similarities of addictive behavior in PD to addiction, particularly the neuroanatomy of reward processing and its alteration in substance and behavioral addictions. Finally, we will discuss molecular imaging approaches which are helping to delineate the structure as well as the dynamic interactions between different components involving neurotransmitters, transporters, and receptors.
Even in the antiretroviral treatment (ART) era, HIV-1-infected patients suffer from milder forms of HIV-1-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). While the viral proteins Tat and gp120 have been shown to individually inhibit the proliferation and neural differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs), no studies have characterized the effects of all the combined viral proteins on adult neurogenesis.
Suicide rates have increased over the past several decades. Prior research has evaluated risk factors for suicidal behavior, but much of this work does not adequately differentiate between risk factors for suicidal ideation (SI) and suicide attempts, nor does it differentiate between first-onset SI and recurrent ideation. This study seeks to identify risk factors for first-onset SI among a high-risk group: individuals receiving treatment for substance use disorders. Data were drawn from the National Treatment Improvement Evaluation Study, a prospective study examining the impact of addiction treatment programs. Patients with no lifetime history of suicide attempts or ideation (n = 2560) were assessed at baseline and one year later for prospectively-occurring SI. Sociodemographic variables, mental health indices, interpersonal factors, and substance use severity indicators were evaluated as prospective predictors of first-onset SI in linear regression models. Current mental health problems (OR = 1.54, 95% CI = 1.19-2.01), current substance use problems (OR = 1.33, 95% CI = 1.04-1.70), and difficulty accessing treatment for substance use problems (OR = 1.90, 95% CI = 1.16-3.11) emerged as significant predictors of first-onset SI in a multivariate analysis, suggesting that individuals with current mental health or substance use related symptoms are among the most at risk for developing SI. Difficulty obtaining treatment remained significant, highlighting the importance of treatment accessibility. Future clinical work and research would benefit by addressing these issues, potentially by focusing on mental health treatment in substance abuse programs and evaluating barriers to treatment.
Pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, and non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS)
Several studies indicate that eating-disorder (ED) psychopathology is elevated in athletes compared to non-athletes. The assessment of excessive exercise among athletes is a challenge because, compared to non-athletes, athletes are required to train at higher intensities and for longer periods of time. However, individuals participating in competitive sports are still susceptible to unhealthy physical-activity patterns. Most ED assessments were developed and normed in non-athlete samples and, therefore, do not capture the nuances of athletes' training experiences. The purpose of the current study was to develop and validate a clinically useful, self-report measure of unhealthy training behaviors and beliefs in athletes, the Athletes' Relationships with Training Scale (ART).
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), pica, and rumination disorder (RD) were added to the revised DSM-5 Feeding and Eating Disorders chapter in 2013. We developed a structured interview-the Pica, ARFID, and Rumination Disorder Interview (PARDI)-to assess the presence and severity of these diagnoses for evaluation and treatment planning in clinical and research settings. Here, we describe the development of the PARDI and provide a preliminary report on feasibility, acceptability, reliability, and validity in relation to ARFID.
The use of atypical antipsychotic medications in pediatric patients has become more prevalent in recent years. The purpose of this review is to provide a clinically relevant update of recent selected key publications regarding the use of atypical antipsychotics in this population.
Early intervention psychiatric services for patients with psychosis aim to limit the most damaging outcomes and reduce the patient's risk of social drift, decreasing illness severity and thus containing healthcare costs. There is a scarcity of studies that focus on first-episode psychosis (FEP), and those few that have been published only looked at direct health costs, but not at indirect costs, which make up the bulk of the budget. Our study aims to explore the short-term (1-year follow-up) economic cost of a FEP Program, including both direct and indirect costs.
Extensive research has been conducted to find neuroimaging biomarkers for psychiatric disorders. This study aimed at identifying trends of the 100 most highly cited articles on neuroimaging in primary psychiatric disorders.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subcallosal cingulate (SCC) is an emerging experimental therapy for treatment-resistant depression. New developments in SCC DBS surgical targeting are focused on identifying specific axonal pathways for stimulation that are estimated from patient-specific computational models. This connectomic-based biophysical modeling strategy has proven successful in improving the clinical response to SCC DBS therapy, but the DBS models used to date have been relatively simplistic, limiting the precision of the pathway activation estimates. Therefore, we used the most detailed patient-specific foundation for DBS modeling currently available (i.e., field-cable modeling) to evaluate SCC DBS in our most recent cohort of six subjects, all of which were responders to the therapy. We quantified activation of four major pathways in the SCC region: forceps minor (FM), cingulum bundle (CB), uncinate fasciculus (UF), and subcortical connections between the frontal pole and the thalamus or ventral striatum (FP). We then used the percentage of activated axons in each pathway as regressors in a linear model to predict the time it took patients to reach a stable response, or TSR. Our analysis suggests that stimulation of the left and right CBs, as well as FM are the most likely therapeutic targets for SCC DBS. In addition, the right CB alone predicted 84% of the variation in the TSR, and the correlation was positive, suggesting that activation of the right CB beyond a critical percentage may actually protract the recovery process.
Sex differences are a prominent feature of the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders, such as major depressive disorder which affects women at a higher incidence than men. Research suggests that the most potent endogenous estrogen, 17β-estradiol, may have therapeutic potential in treating depression. However, preclinical studies have produced mixed results, likely due to various methodological factors such as treatment duration. This study aimed to investigate the effects of ovariectomy and chronic 17β-estradiol treatment via a subcutaneous silastic implant on behaviours relevant to depression in adult female Sprague-Dawley rats. Rats were assessed in the forced swim test, saccharin preference test, novel object recognition memory test and for possible confounding behaviours, including locomotion and anxiety (open field test) and motivation and anxiety (novelty supressed feeding test). Treatment effects were verified using body and uterus weight, as well as serum concentrations of 17β-estradiol, progesterone and testosterone. Compared to ovariectomised rats, chronic 17β-estradiol treatment enhanced saccharin preference and novel object recognition performance. There were no group differences in passive or active coping behaviour when assayed using the forced swim test. Taken together, these results support an antidepressant-like action of estrogens but highlight that the beneficial effects of chronic 17β-estradiol treatment may be related to specific depression-related symptoms, particularly anhedonia and memory. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
In Taiwan, few studies explored the morbidity of mental disorders among prisoners. The purpose of this study is conducted to estimate the prevalence of mental disorders in Taiwanese prisoners.
To compare treatment outcomes in patients with major depressive disorder treated with duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or sertraline for up to 6 months.
Mood disorders are associated with significant psychosocial and occupational disability. It is estimated that major depressive disorder (MDD) will become the second leading cause of disability worldwide by 2020. Existing pharmacological and psychological treatments are limited for targeting cognitive dysfunctions in mood disorders. However, growing evidence from human and animal studies has shown that treatment with erythropoietin (EPO) can improve cognitive function. A recent study involving EPO-treated patients with mood disorders showed that the neural basis for their cognitive improvements appeared to involve an increase in hippocampal volume. Molecular mechanisms underlying hippocampal changes have been proposed, including the activation of anti-apoptotic, antioxidant, pro-survival and anti-inflammatory signalling pathways. The aim of this review is to describe the potential importance of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3β) as a multi-potent molecular mechanism of EPO-induced hippocampal volume change in mood disorder patients. We first examine published associations between EPO administration, mood disorders, cognition and hippocampal volume. We then highlight evidence suggesting that GSK3β influences hippocampal volume in MDD patients, and how this could assist with targeting more precise treatments particularly for cognitive deficits in patients with mood disorders. We conclude by suggesting how this developing area of research can be further advanced, such as using pharmacogenetic studies of EPO treatment in patients with mood disorders.
To estimate the proportion of adult primary care outpatients who are clinically detected and initiate treatment for depression and alcohol use disorder (AUD) in low-income and middle-income country (LMIC) settings.
Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) is the most common form of human prion disease. It is invariably fatal and displays a short clinical disease stage. The key event in sCJD is the propagation of a beta-sheet rich conformer of the physiological PrP
PQ912 is an inhibitor of the glutaminyl cyclase enzyme that plays a central role in the formation of synaptotoxic pyroglutamate-A-beta oligomers. We report on the first clinical study with PQ912 in subjects with biomarker-proven Alzheimer's disease (AD). The aim was to determine the maximal tolerated dose, target occupancy and treatment-related pharmacodynamic effects. The exploratory efficacy readouts selected were tailored to the patient population with early AD. The therapeutic approach focuses on synaptic dysfunction as captured by various measures such as electroencephalography (EEG), synaptic biomarkers and sensitive cognitive tests.
Although antipsychotic monotherapy is recommended as the main treatment for schizophrenia, antipsychotic polypharmacy is not rare in practice. However, longitudinal data on antipsychotic polypharmacy in schizophrenia treatment are limited.
Cytochrome b5 reductase 3 (CYB5R3) is a membrane-bound NADH-dependent redox enzyme anchored to the mitochondrial outer membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, and plasma membrane. Recessive hereditary methaemoglobinaemia (RHM) type II is caused by CYB5R3 deficiency and is an incurable disease characterized by severe encephalopathy with mental retardation, microcephaly, generalized dystonia, and movement disorders. Currently, the etiology of type II RHM is poorly understood and there is no treatment for encephalopathy associated with this disease. Defective CYB5R3 leads to defects in the elongation and desaturation of fatty acids and cholesterol biosynthesis, which are conventionally linked with neurological disorders of type II RHM. Nevertheless, this abnormal lipid metabolism cannot explain all manifestations observed in patients. Current molecular and cellular studies indicate that CYB5R3 deficiency has pleiotropic tissue effects. Its localization in lipid rafts of neurons indicates its role in interneuronal contacts and its presence in caveolae of the vascular endothelial membrane suggests a role in the modulation of nitric oxide diffusion. Its role in aerobic metabolism and oxidative stress in fibroblasts, neurons, and cardiomyocytes has been reported to be due to its ability to modulate the intracellular ratio of NAD⁺/NADH. Based on the new molecular and cellular functions discovered for CYB5R3 linked to the plasma membrane and mitochondria, the conventional conception that the cause of type II RHM is a lipid metabolism disorder should be revised. We hypothesized that neurological symptoms of the disease could be caused by disorders in the synapse, aerobic metabolism, and/or vascular homeostasis rather than in disturbances of lipid metabolism.
Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have a considerable use of psychotropics. Leveraging nationwide registry data, we aimed to describe the use of psychotropics among children and adolescents with ASD in Denmark. Use of melatonin and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medication increased from 2010 to 2017, while there were limited changes in use of antidepressants and antipsychotics. Thirty percent of the identified children used psychotropics in 2017 most commonly ADHD medication (17%) and melatonin (13%). Methylphenidate, sertraline and risperidone were most often prescribed. Most children filled more than one prescription and, across drug classes, at least 38% received treatment two years after treatment initiation. Use of psychotropics followed psychiatric comorbidities. Comorbidities did not affect age at treatment initiation. Use of psychotropics varied according to age and sex with limited use in the youngest children. In summary, psychotropic drug use has increased in children with ASD mainly due to an increase in the use of ADHD medication and melatonin. In accordance with previous studies, use seems to follow comorbidities. The long treatment duration underlines the need to investigate long-term effects of psychotropic drug use in children with ASD.
The purpose of this study was to determine, within the first-year post-head and neck cancer (HNC) diagnosis, the contribution of past and upon HNC psychiatric diagnoses (i.e., substance use disorder (SUD), major depressive disorder (MDD), and anxiety disorder (AD)) to the extent (i.e., cumulated dose) of opioid prescription.
Death anxiety has been proposed as a transdiagnostic construct, underlying numerous mental disorders. Although it has been argued that treatments, which reduce death anxiety, are needed, research investigating the impact of interventions on death fears has produced mixed results. As such, the current meta-analysis aimed to examine the effect of psychosocial interventions on death anxiety. Overall, results from 15 randomised controlled trials suggested that psychosocial treatments produced significant reductions in death anxiety, with a small to medium effect size (g = .45). Intervention type (death education vs. therapy) did not significantly moderate the effect of intervention on death anxiety (g = -.47). However, therapy type was a significant moderator of treatment efficacy (g = -1.39). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy was found to be particularly efficacious, producing significant reductions in death anxiety relative to control (g = 1.7), whereas other therapies did not (g = .20). The number of treatment sessions and baseline death anxiety significantly moderated intervention efficacy, whereas the duration of the intervention, training of the interventionist, and clinical nature of the sample did not. Given the small number and generally low quality of the included studies, future research using more rigorous methodology, as well as clinical samples, is needed.
The growing trend in the use of the Internet and social media as a method of self-managing illness presents a critical opportunity to better understand the role of pro-anorexia (pro-ana) websites for eating disorders. Therefore, 155 pro-ana website messages regarding criticism that the site was responsible for developing anorexia were inductively thematically analysed. The analysis revealed five main themes: eating disorders are mental illnesses and websites do not cause mental illness, pro-ana websites and eating disorders are more than wanting to be thin (with sub-theme residents and visitors), eating disorders develop regardless of pro-ana websites, pro-ana sites do not cause eating disorders but they may trigger or encourage them (with sub-theme the problem is the user, not the site) and pro-ana sites provide support. Pro-ana websites and online communities present clinicians with complex treatment challenges. Collaborative, therapeutic consultations about pro-ana website use may help to establish how and when accessing them may hinder the treatment process.
Demoralization is defined as a pervasive, generalized negative emotional construct present in psychiatric disorders and a variety of medical conditions. Demoralization is also conceptualized as a ubiquitous affective-laden factor common to most forms of psychopathology that increases the magnitude of intercorrelations among putatively distinct psychiatric symptom scales (Tellegen, 1985). Using exploratory structural equation modeling to identify common variance across the revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R), a measure of the five-factor model of personality, Noordhof, Sellbom, Eigenhuis, and Kamphuis (2015) constructed an 18-item Demoralization subscale in a Dutch-speaking sample of patients attending a clinic for personality disorders in the Netherlands. In the current study we sought to cross-validate these findings in an English-speaking and diagnostically heterogeneous sample of psychiatric patients (N = 1930) receiving consultation or treatment at a large mental health and addiction center in Canada. Our results support the construct validity of the Demoralization subscale and its capacity to account for demoralization-related variance in the NEO PI-R. We believe these findings support the general tenets of demoralization and the presence of this construct in the NEO PI-R item pool. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).
Cognitive deficits including impaired working memory are a hallmark feature of schizophrenia. Dopamine D1 receptor modulated changes in prefrontal cortex function play a potentially important role in the pathology underlying such deficits. However, pharmacological interventions that selectively engage the D1 receptor are severely restricted for research in humans. The present study is a proof-of-principle for enhancing cognitive performance and associated brain activation via indirect D1 stimulation, operationalised by combining the nonselective dopamine agonist L-dopa with the D2-antagonist haloperidol.
Outcome measures that capture functional abilities related to cognition offer the potential to demonstrate real-world effectiveness of cognitive-enhancing treatments. However, distinguishing functional disability related to cognition from that attributed to motor symptoms can be difficult in PD. A performance-based functional assessment allows for direct observation of activity of daily living skills and separation of cognitive from motoric disabilities.
Pathogenesis of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) is mediated through the infiltration of perivascular macrophages into the brain with the secretion of viral, neurotoxic and inflammatory proteins. One of these proteins is cathepsin B (CATB), a lysosomal cysteine protease that induces neuronal apoptosis, and increases in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid from HIV-1 infected patients (Cantres-Rosario et al. AIDS 27(3):347-356, 2013). Cocaine further potentiates CATB neurotoxicity in vitro and in vivo (Zenón et al. J NeuroImmune Pharmacol 9(5):703-715, 2014). Modulation of sigma-1 (Sig1R) by cocaine increases oxidative species, cytokines and other factors that promote lysosomal disruption. However, the role of Sig1R in CATB secretion and HIV-1 replication in macrophages exposed to cocaine is unknown. We hypothesized that pharmacological modulation of Sig1R would alter CATB secretion from HIV-1 infected macrophages in vitro and in vivo. To test our hypothesis, monocyte derived-macrophages (MDM) from HIV-1 seronegative donors were isolated, infected with HIV-1
Aged patients with severe mental illness (SMI) suffer from a high risk for functional impairment and a high load of somatic comorbidities. Until now, there has been a lack of systematic studies on this patient population in later life. This review summarizes the most significant somatic comorbidities and discusses the consequences for the medical care of this elderly group of patients.
To explore alterations in gray matter volume in patients with functional movement disorders.
To examine the association of atrial fibrillation (AF) with cognitive decline and dementia in old age, and to explore the cognitive benefit of antithrombotic treatment in patients with AF.
Previous research has demonstrated the clinical effectiveness of long-term psychological treatment for people with some types of personality disorder. However, the high intensity and cost of these interventions limit their availability. Lower-intensity interventions are increasingly being offered to people with personality disorder, but their clinical and cost effectiveness have not been properly tested in experimental studies. We therefore set out to develop a low intensity intervention for people with personality disorder and to test the feasibility of conducting a randomized controlled trial to compare the clinical effectiveness of this intervention with that of treatment as usual (TAU).
The clinical high-risk state in psychosis is most often characterized by subthreshold psychotic symptoms (STPS) and represents a target for psychosis prevention. However, evidence suggests that between 30% and 50% of patients with a first episode of psychosis (FEP) report no prior history of STPS, indicating that not all patients with FEP experience a previous clinical high-risk phase. As with other early characteristics of illness onset, this diversity in the early course of symptoms may offer prognostic value for subsequent clinical trajectories.
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are severe and complex brain disorders characterized by substantial clinical and biological heterogeneity. However, case-control studies often ignore such heterogeneity through their focus on the average patient, which may be the core reason for a lack of robust biomarkers indicative of an individual's treatment response and outcome.
Citrus species are widely related to antihyperalgesic and anti-inflammatory effects. The aim of this study was to investigate if treatment with ethanolic extract from peels of mature Citrus reticulata Blanco causes antihyperalgesic effects on the referred mechanical hyperalgesia in a model of dextran sulphate of sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice, as well as the possible oxidative damage in different regions of the brain induced by its inflammatory reaction. Antihyperalgesia (30 to 300 mg/kg) was investigated by behavioral response (frequency of response to von Frey filament stimulation) in Swiss mice, while damage to central nervous system was investigated through techniques that evaluated oxidative stress using male black C57 BL6 mice (n=8). Treatment of the animals with the extract (100 mg/kg) from days 3 to 5 after colitis induction reduced referred the mechanical hyperalgesia (32.6 ± 5.1) in relation to the control group (57.4 ± 2.0). Levels of lipid peroxidation or carbonyl proteins were augmented in colitis-induced animals in relation to the disease group. These results indicated an antihyperalgesic effect of the studied extract and a potential impairment of the central nervous system functioning caused by inflammation during colitis, which could be related to mental disorders observed in patients suffering of this pathology.
Despite high rates of alcohol use disorder (AUD) and alcohol-induced deaths among Native Americans, there has been limited study of the construct validity of the AUD diagnostic criteria. The purpose of the current study was to examine the validity of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) AUD criteria in a treatment-seeking group of Native Americans.
For a number of mental health disorders, including posttraumatic stress disorders (PTSD), there are not many available treatment options. Recently, there has been renewed interest in the potential of methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) to restore function for patients with these disorders. The primary hypothesis is that MDMA, via prosocial effects, increases the ability of patients to address the underlying psychopathology of the disorder. However, the use of MDMA poses potential problems of neurotoxicity, in addition to its own potential for misuse.
Depression is common in young people, and there is a need for safe, effective treatments. This study examined the efficacy of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in a sample of young people aged 17 to 25 years.
Antepartum depression, frequently in comorbidity with anxiety disorders, is a severe psychopathological condition frequently reported in pregnancy and in many cases associated with obstetric and neonatal complications and potential negative consequences on child neurodevelopment. However, the pharmacological treatment of depression, during pregnancy generates a lot of concerns about the risks of such treatment for the fetus development and the neonatal health. The aim of this review is to present a selection of the latest international literature including recent original studies, systematic reviews, meta-analyses and recommendations from the guidelines, both on the risks of an untreated depressive disorders and on the risk of antidepressant therapy during gestation with drugs belonging to the SSRI and SNRI (SRI) class. An updated information of the recent risk-benefit data of these drug treatments in women with affective disorders in pregnancy may actually enable better and more conscious management of these disorders, not only for those working in the mental health field but also for general practitioners and those of other medical specialties.
The aim of this narrative summary was to examine the efficacy of physical activity and exercise as a universal prevention for depression in young people.
Chronic schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorders, among other chronic psychiatric disorders with onset at youth or early adulthood are often referred to as severe mental illness (SMI). Aging with SMI is associated with various psychosocial, physiological, and medical problems with potential impact on psychiatric pharmacotherapy.
Epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications are biochemical alterations of the DNA or its spatial structure. They regulate gene function, can be modified by environmental influences and are temporally dynamic. In this review, the current state of knowledge regarding the role of epigenetics in the pathogenesis of mental disorders is summarized exemplarily for schizophrenia, depression, anxiety disorders and posttraumatic stress disorder. Additionally, findings on epigenetic alterations in the course of pharmacotherapeutic and psychotherapeutic interventions are presented. Epigenetic mechanisms have a central function at the crossroads between genes and environment and consequently in the vulnerability-stress model of mental disorders. Prospectively, in line with a precision medicine approach epigenetic profiles may represent useful markers of disease risk and therapy response or even constitute new druggable targets.
Age has been shown to have an impact on both grey (GM) and white matter (WM) volume, with a steeper slope of age-related decline in schizophrenia compared to healthy controls. In schizophrenia, the relation between age and brain volume is further complicated by factors such as lower intelligence, antipsychotic medication, and cannabis use, all of which have been shown to have independent effects on brain volume. In a study of first-episode, antipsychotic-naïve schizophrenia patients (N = 54) and healthy controls (N = 56), we examined the effects of age on whole brain measures of GM and WM volume, and whether these relationships were moderated by schizophrenia and intelligence (IQ). Secondarily, we examined lifetime cannabis use as a moderator of the relationship between age and brain volume. Schizophrenia patients had lower GM volumes than healthy controls but did not differ on WM volume. We found an age effect on GM indicating that increasing age was associated with lower GM volumes, which did not differ between groups. IQ did not have a direct effect on GM, but showed a trend-level interaction with age, suggesting a greater impact of age with lower IQ. There were no age effects on WM volume, but a direct effect of IQ, with higher IQ showing an association with larger WM volume. Lifetime cannabis use did not alter these findings significantly. This study points to effects of schizophrenia on GM early in the illness, before antipsychotic treatment is initiated, suggesting that WM changes may occur later in the disease process.
Non-adherence with pharmacologic treatment is associated with increased rates of relapse and rehospitalisation among patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. To improve treatment response, remission, and recovery, research efforts are still needed to elucidate how to effectively map patient's response to medication treatment including both therapeutic and adverse effects, compliance, and satisfaction in the prodromal phase of illness (ie, the time period in between direct clinical consultation and relapse). The Actionable Intime Insights (AI
Fear is prone to return following extinction that is the basis of exposure therapy for fear-related disorders. Manipulations that enhance the extinction process can be beneficial for treatment. Animal studies have shown that fasting or caloric restriction can enhance extinction and inhibit the return of fear. The present study examined the effects of fasting on fear acquisition, extinction, and the return of fear in humans. One hundred and twenty-five male participants were randomized into a fasting group and food group and exposed to a Pavlovian fear conditioning paradigm. Changes in plasma cortisol and ghrelin levels were examined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. One-night fasting had no effect on fear acquisition but enhanced fear extinction retention and prevented the return of fear, and this effect persisted for at least 6 months. This procedure was also effective for remote fear memory. Plasma ghrelin levels were elevated after fasting and had a negative relationship with the fear response in spontaneous recovery test. However, overnight fasting did not affect cortisol levels. These findings indicate that fasting enhances extinction retention and prevents the return of fear, without influencing fear memory formation. We propose that this novel procedure may open new avenues for promoting extinction-based therapies for fear-related disorders.
In this clinical review we summarise what in our view have been some the most important advances in the past two decades, in terms of diagnostic definition, epidemiology, genetics and environmental causes, neuroimaging/cognition and treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), including: (1) the most recent changes to the diagnostic criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and International Classification of Diseases; (2) meta-analytic evidence showing that, after accounting for diagnostic methods, the rates of ADHD are fairly consistent across Western countries; (3) the recent finding of the first genome-wide significant risk loci for ADHD; (4) the paradigm shift in the pathophysiological conceptualisation of ADHD from alterations in individual brain regions to a complex dysfunction in brain networks; (5) evidence supporting the short-term efficacy of ADHD pharmacological treatments, with a different profile of efficacy and tolerability in children/adolescents versus adults; (6) a series of meta-analyses showing that, while non-pharmacological treatment may not be effective to target ADHD core symptoms, some of them effectively address ADHD-related impairments (such as oppositional behaviours for parent training and working memory deficits for cognitive training). We also discuss key priorities for future research in each of these areas of investigation. Overall, while many research questions have been answered, many others need to be addressed. Strengthening multidisciplinary collaborations, relying on large data sets in the spirit of Open Science and supporting research in less advantaged countries will be key to face the challenges ahead.
Care-seeking for sexual dysfunction is limited by embarrassment, efficacy/safety concerns, and cost. Nutritional supplements (NSs) are low-cost but unproven.
Recent advances in statistical methods and computing power have improved the ability to predict risks associated with mental illness with more efficiency and accuracy. However, integrating statistical prediction into a clinical setting poses new challenges that need creative solutions. A case example explores the challenges and innovations that emerged at a Department of Veterans Affairs hospital while implementing REACH VET (Recovery Engagement and Coordination for Health-Veterans Enhanced Treatment), a suicide prevention program that is based on a predictive model that identifies veterans at statistical risk for suicide.
Schizophrenia is a serious chronic mental illness that results in marginalization and stigma for sufferers. It is the seventh leading cause for disability worldwide. The symptoms of the illness, including hallucinations, delusions, and extremely disordered thinking and behavior, may also introduce barriers to accessing treatment, education, housing, and employment. Little is known about end-of-life care for individuals with schizophrenia. To address this gap, a scoping review was conducted to enhance understanding of hospice and palliative care for patients with schizophrenia. From this scoping review, 342 unique titles and abstracts were identified through a search of 20 databases, including 11 social science databases, 6 medical databases, and 3 gray literature databases. A total of 32 articles met the inclusion criteria and the following 4 themes were identified: Stigma affecting quality of care and access to care; Issues related to consent and capacity for the patient's end-of-life care decisions and to appoint substitute decision makers; Best practices for psychosocial interventions, pharmacology, family and health-care collaborations, goals of care, setting, and smoking; and Barriers to care, including setting, communication, provider education, and access to care. The review suggests the importance of mandatory interdisciplinary training practices and policy standards outlining cooperative communication across health-care providers. It highlights gaps in evidence-based research on psychosocial interventions and collaborative frameworks to enable the provision of quality end-of-life care for individuals with schizophrenia.
The aim of the present study was to examine the differences in sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of 104 women diagnosed with compulsive buying behaviour (CBB = 55) or gambling disorder (GD = 49) treated at three public hospitals unit specialized in behavioural addictions from January 2004 to December 2015. Significant between-group differences in sociodemographic variables were observed for cohabitation status (living with a partner or not) and educational level, with a higher percentage of women in the GD group cohabiting (х
Common mental health problems (CMHPs), such as depression, anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are internalizing disorders with high comorbidity. University and college students are under many stressors and transitional events, and students fall within the age range when CMHPs are at their developmental peak. Compared to the expanded effort to explore and treat CMHPs, there has been no a meta-analysis that comprehensively reviewed the interventions for CMHPs and examined the effects of interventions for CMHPs in college students. The objective of this review is to conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) examining interventions for CMHPs among university and college students and to estimate their post-intervention effect size (ES), as well as follow-up ES, for depression, anxiety disorder, OCD and PTSD separately. Meta-analytic procedures were conducted in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. We reviewed 7768 abstracts from which 331 full-text articles were reviewed and 51 RCTs were included in the analysis. We found moderate effect sizes for both depression (Hedges' g = -0.60) and anxiety disorder (Hedges' g = -0.48). There was no evidence that existing interventions for OCD or PTSD were effective in this population. For interventions with high number of papers, we performed subgroup analysis and found that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and mindfulness-based interventions were effective for both depression and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and attention/perception modification was effective for GAD; other interventions (i.e. art, exercise and peer support) had the highest ES for both depression and GAD among university and college students.
The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) proposed a diagnostic scheme for psychogenic nonepileptic seizures (PNES). The debate on ethical aspects of the diagnostic procedures is ongoing, the treatment is not standardized, and management might differ according to the age groups.
Child Sexual Abuse (CSA) is a pressing human right issue and public health concern. We conducted a systematic review of quantitative and qualitative studies published in the past decade on CSA in India to examine the distribution of the prevalence estimates for both genders, to improve understanding of the determinants and consequences of CSA and identify gaps in the current state of research.
The purposes of this study were to explore clinical nurse specialists' views of the potential influence of a mental health portal on nursing practice and to identify portal implementation strategies.
The purpose of this study was to validate a tool to assess alcohol withdrawal in acute care patients. Study aims included (1) establish content validity, (2) examine criterion-related validity, (3) test interrater reliability, and (4) assess nurse usability.
Assessment of cognitive function in people with neurosychiatric disorders can be challenging, due to behavioural and psychiatric symptomatology. The Behavioural Assesment Tool for Cognition and Higher Functioning (BATCH) is a validated observational tool that complements formal cognitive testing in this patient population. This study aimed to determine the capacity of the BATCH as a predictive tool for discharge planning.
Pregnancy represents a time of increased risk for intimate partner violence (IPV), and an HIV diagnosis further increases the vulnerability of this at-risk group. This study explores experiences of recent IPV using qualitative interviews with N = 12 HIV-positive pregnant women recruited from a clinical setting in South Africa, a location with a high global prevalence of IPV and HIV. Partner dynamics around IPV resulted in HIV shame and stigma and adversely affected engagement in HIV care and HIV treatment behaviors. The results highlight the challenges women face in navigating disclosure of both IPV and HIV, accessing necessary support, and engaging in both HIV-related and pregnancy-related care in the context of an abusive relationship.
To examine Veterans Health Administration (VA) enrollees' use of VA services for treatment of behavioral health conditions (BHCs) after gaining Medicaid, and if VA reliance varies by complexity of BHCs.
The aim of this study is to review evidence on the cost-effectiveness of exercise-based interventions in the treatment of chronic conditions a decade after the publication of Roine et al. in 2009 (Roine E, Roine RP, Räsänen P, et al. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2009;25:427-454).
To identify the relationship between the core Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.) ADHD symptoms and executive function deficits (EFDs), to evaluate ADHD characteristics of those with executive dysfunction (ED), and to examine the predictive utility of the Adult ADHD Investigator Symptom Rating Scale (AISRS) in identifying those with adult ADHD and ED.
The prevalence rate of obesity continues to rise in the U.S., but effective treatment options remain elusive resulting in increased emphasis on prevention. One such area of prevention research capitalizes on the relatively novel behavioral construct of food addiction, which has been implicated in obesity. Food addiction reflects an individual's propensity for compulsive eating despite negative consequences, and shares not only symptoms with both eating and substance use disorders but also genetic and neural correlates within neural reward-circuitry modulated by dopamine. Here, we examined associations between food addiction scores, body mass index (BMI), reward-related ventral striatum activity, and a polygenic score approximating dopamine signaling in 115 non-Hispanic Caucasian young adult university students. As predicted, polygenic dopamine scores were related to ventral striatum activity, which in turn was associated with higher food addiction scores. In addition, food addiction was related to BMI. An exploratory post-hoc path analysis further indicated that polygenic scores were indirectly related to both food addiction and BMI, in part, through ventral striatum activity. Collectively, our results provide evidence supporting the utility of food addiction in weight gain prevention research by establishing links with known risk-related neural and genetic biomarkers.
(1) Untreated mental disorders and mental illness in children can lead to costly outcomes such as school dropout, substance use and suicide. (2) Half of lifetime cases of mental illness begin by age 14 and 75 percent of all lifetime cases present by age 24. (3) Early intervention and access to treatment may decrease the financial and health burdens associated with mental illness.
Atypical antipsychotics are highly effective antischizophrenic medications but their clinical utility is limited by adverse metabolic sequelae. We investigated whether upregulation of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) underlies the insulin resistance that develops during treatment with the most commonly prescribed atypical antipsychotic, olanzapine. Olanzapine monotherapy increased BMI and circulating insulin, triglyceride, and MIF concentrations in drug-naive schizophrenic patients with normal MIF expression, but not in genotypic low MIF expressers. Olanzapine administration to mice increased their food intake and hypothalamic MIF expression, which led to activation of the appetite-related AMP-activated protein kinase and Agouti-related protein pathway. Olanzapine also upregulated MIF expression in adipose tissue, which reduced lipolysis and increased lipogenic pathways. Increased plasma lipid concentrations were associated with abnormal fat deposition in liver and skeletal muscle, which are important determinants of insulin resistance. Global MIF-gene deletion protected mice from olanzapine-induced insulin resistance, as did intracerebroventricular injection of neutralizing anti-MIF antibody, supporting the role of increased hypothalamic MIF expression in metabolic dysfunction. These findings uphold the potential pharmacogenomic value of MIF genotype determination and suggest that MIF may be a tractable target for reducing the metabolic side effects of atypical antipsychotic therapy.
Health-based electronic games present an innovative tool to deal with mental and behavioral disorders as well as physical. An appropriately designed game can optimize health care. The aim of this study was to establish a design for health-based electronic games model and to develop a sample game in diabetes. This study was carried out in two phases: first, the design of a health-based electronic game framework and second, the design and production of sweet care game. There were two intended information prerequisites: determination of effective components in models of behavior change and validation of these components on health topics and structural formation of a game. The game framework design was presented. In the second phase, a sample of the game was developed in the field of diabetes. Important components to empower people were ranked using the Friedman test in the following order: self-learning, treatment, mental empowerment, condition management, healthy eating and physical activity. The axis of self-learning received the highest rating from the perspective of the subjects with an average of 3.93 percent. Another part was the game framework with components as follows: application areas, educational content for change behavior, resources, game structure and game production. Finally, the sweet care game was designed on diabetes with educational, technological and clinical content. The health-based electronic game designed on a systematic framework could be applied as a tool to expanding the knowledge base on how to create effective health-based digital games that entertain while promoting behavior change.
There is considerable need for effective and accessible treatment for opioid use disorder.
Anxiety-related disorders are common in the child and adolescent population. They cause significant distress, which can affect social, emotional, family and academic functioning. They frequently present in general paediatric and primary care settings. Comprehensive assessment should include the child as well as parent and family functioning because anxiety-related disorders in other family members are common and, if untreated, can affect outcomes for the child. There are good evidence-based psychological interventions available, which should be the first line of treatment offered; accessing appropriate therapies for an adequate duration of treatment can, however, be challenging. Medication, particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, may have a role to play but should be used in the context of psychologically based therapies. Prevention of anxiety-related disorders in childhood is a major public health issue. Prevention programmes are available and should commence in the antenatal period through infancy, early childhood and adolescence, promoting positive attachments and resilience.
Aggression in children is a common transdiagnostic symptom associated with a wide range of developmental and mental health problems. It emerges early and without intervention, may increase in severity as the child grows stronger. Aggressive children are more likely to experience physical and mental illness, unemployment, poverty and forensic problems as adults. Strategies to prevent aggression must address risk factors: low maternal education, adolescent pregnancy, in utero exposure to tobacco and alcohol, poverty, coercive parenting, childhood maltreatment and bullying victimisation. The aggressive child requires a comprehensive assessment to identify and manage underlying or comorbid problems, to understand the reasons for the aggressive behaviour and to detect modifiable factors that exacerbate or perpetuate the aggression. Psychosocial interventions include parenting skills training and child-directed cognitive behavioural therapy, whereas pharmacotherapy may be used to treat underlying developmental or mental health problems or to manage the aggression.
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) is a clinically approved thiol-containing redox modulatory compound currently in trials for many neurological and psychiatric disorders. Although generically labeled as an "antioxidant", poor understanding of its site(s) of action is a barrier to its use in neurological practice. Here, we examined the efficacy and mechanism of action of NAC in rodent models of hemorrhagic stroke.
Depression is one of the most disabling conditions in the world. In many cases patients continue to suffer with depressive disorders despite a series of adequate trials of medication and psychotherapy. Neuromodulation treatments offer a qualitatively different modality of treatment that can frequently prove efficacious in these treatment-refractory patients. The field of neuromodulation focuses on the use of electrical/electromagnetic energy, both invasively and noninvasively, to interface with and ultimately alter activity within the human brain for therapeutic purposes. These treatments provide another set of options to offer patients when clinically indicated, and knowledge of their safety, risks and benefits, and appropriate clinical application is essential for modern psychiatrists and other mental health professionals. Although neuromodulation techniques hold tremendous promise, only three such treatments are currently approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of major depressive disorder: electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Additionally, numerous other neurostimulation modalities (deep brain stimulation [DBS], magnetic seizure therapy [MST], transcranial electric stimulation [tES], and trigeminal nerve stimulation [TNS]), though currently experimental, show considerable therapeutic promise. Researchers are actively looking for ways to optimize outcomes and clinical benefits by making neuromodulation treatments safer, more efficacious, and more durable.
Common mental health problems affect a quarter of the population. Online cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is increasingly used, but the factors modulating response to this treatment modality remain unclear.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is the treatment of choice for generalised anxiety disorder (GAD), yielding significant improvements in approximately 50% of patients. There is significant room for improvement in the outcomes of treatment, especially in recovery.
